Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like these
videos, please subscribe to follow along with the
series. Also, please like and leave a comment,
and share the video to help spread this
free series of videos. Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover
FTP, File Transfer Protocol,
and TFTP, Trivial File Transfer Protocol.
As the names suggest, both of these protocols are
used to transfer files over a network. They are
exam topic 4.9, which states that you must be
able to describe the capabilities and function
of TFTP and FTP in the network. So, make sure
you understand the purpose of these protocols,
and make sure you know the differences between
them, even though their purposes are similar.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First up, I’ll introduce the purpose of FTP
and TFTP. The names tell you what their basic
purpose is, but I’ll give a brief overview. Then
we’ll compare the two protocols to learn about
their functions and how they are different.
Then I’ll introduce the various file systems
on Cisco IOS. A basic understanding of how
files are stored on Cisco devices is important.
Finally, we’ll take a look at how to use FTP and
TFTP in Cisco IOS. As always, watch until
the end of the video for a bonus practice
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for
CCNA, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
Here’s a quick summary of FTP and TFTP. FTP,
which stands for File Transfer Protocol,
and TFTP, which stands for Trivial File
Transfer Protocol, are both industry
standard protocols used to transfer files over
a network. They both use a client-server model.
Clients can use FTP or TFTP to copy
files from an FTP or TFTP server.
They can also use FTP or TFTP to copy files to a
server. As a network engineer, the most common use
for FTP and TFTP is in the process of upgrading
the operating system of a network device.
You can use FTP or TFTP on the device to
download the newer version of IOS and then
reboot the device with the new IOS image. This is,
of course, not the only use for these protocols.
They can be used to transfer all kinds of
files between different devices over a network.
But for this video, we’ll use this example. So,
here’s a sample network. I haven’t included any
cables or anything, we don’t need any details. So,
on the left is a server at software.cisco.com. The
network admin will download the new IOS image
from Cisco. Then he will transfer the IOS image
to a server that is reachable by the device he
is going to update, which in this example is R1
on the right. Finally, the network admin will
use commands in the CLI of R1 to copy the file
into the flash memory of R1. The last step after
that is to reboot R1 using the new version of IOS.
So, later in this video I’ll show you how
to use the CLI of a Cisco device to transfer
files using FTP and TFTP, and then how to reboot
the device with the new IOS image to update it.
Okay, now let’s move on to talk about
TFTP, the Trivial File Transfer Protocol.
TFTP was first standardized in 1981.
This is after FTP, but because TFTP is
simpler I want to introduce it first. It was
named the ‘trivial’ file transfer protocol
because it is simple and has only basic
features when compared to FTP. It only
allows a client to copy a file to or from a
server. Nothing else, just simple file transfers.
As I said, it was released after FTP, but it’s
not a replacement for FTP. It is just another
tool to use when a lightweight, simple protocol
is more important than advanced functionality.
TFTP doesn’t use any authentication,
meaning no usernames and passwords,
so servers will respond to all TFTP requests.
There’s no username or password to check.
Also, there is no encryption so all data is
sent in plain text. Because of this lack of
security, TFTP is best used in a controlled
environment to transfer small files quickly.
You probably shouldn’t use it to transfer
important files over the Internet, for example.
TFTP servers listen on UDP port 69. So, when
clients initiate communications with the server,
they will use UDP port 69 as the destination port.
As you already know, UDP is connectionless and
doesn’t provide reliability using retransmissions.
However, TFTP actually has similar built-in
connection and reliability features within
the TFTP protocol itself. Let’s take a look.
First I’ll introduce how TFTP provides reliability
using acknowledgments and retransmissions. Every
TFTP data message is acknowledged. So, if the
client is transferring a file to the server,
the server will send Ack messages,
one for each data message.
However, if the server is transferring a file
to the client, then the client will send Ack
messages, one for each data message from the
server. Timers are used, and if an expected
message isn’t received in time, the waiting
device will re-send its previous message.
Let me demonstrate. The PC on the right is a
TFTP client, and the server on the left is a TFTP
server. To download a file from the server,
the client sends a ‘read request’ message.
The server then replies with a data
message, containing part of the file.
The client replies with an Ack, but for some
reason the message doesn’t reach the server.
Because the client sent the Ack, it is waiting for
the next data message, but it doesn’t come. So,
the client retransmits the Ack message, which
successfully reaches the server. The server then
replies with the next data message, and the client
replies with an Ack. This exchange will continue
until the client has received the entire file.
This is called ‘lock-step’ communication.
The client and server alternately send a message
and then wait for a reply, send a message,
wait for a reply, etc. The server will never
send two data messages in a row, for example,
except in the case of retransmission. So, this
method of reliability isn’t as efficient as TCP’s
forward acknowledgment and sliding
window, but it gets the job done.
Next, let me introduce TFTP’s connections.
TFTP file transfers have three phases.
First, the connection phase. The
client sends a request to the server,
and the server responds back, initializing the
connection. Then the data transfer occurs, and
data and acknowledgment messages are exchanged.
After the last data message a final Ack message
is sent, terminating the connection. Let me
demonstrate. So, the client sends a request,
and the server replies by sending the first data
packet. The connection is officially established.
The client responds with an Ack, and there is an
exchange of data packets and Acks. These messages,
including the first data packet, are the data
transfer portion of the file transfer. Finally,
the client sends an Ack for the last data packet,
and the connection is terminated. So, although
TFTP doesn’t use TCP, it does have a basic way of
managing connections within the protocol itself.
Now I’m going to introduce an interesting part
of TFTP’s operation. This isn’t something you
have to know for the CCNA exam, I just thought it
was interesting so I’m going to share it briefly.
As expected, when the client sends
the first message to the server,
the destination port is UDP port 69 and the source
is a random ephemeral port. In TFTP this random
port is called a ‘Transfer Identifier’, TID, and
is used to identify that particular data transfer.
However, here’s where the functionality
is different than you might expect.
The server then also selects a random TID
to use as the source port when it replies.
It doesn’t use port 69 as the source port.
Then, when the client sends the next message,
the destination port will be the server’s TID,
again not 69. So, I’ll demonstrate how that works.
The client sends a message to the server with a
random source port and a destination port of 69.
When the server replies, instead of using 69 as
the source port it also uses a random port. Then
the client replies, and uses that random port as
the destination port, it no longer uses port 69.
And the devices continue to use these two random
ports throughout the data transfer. So, TFTP’s
well-known port of 69 is only used in the very
first message from the client to the server. As
I mentioned, this is beyond the scope of the CCNA,
but it’s an interesting part of TFTP’s operation.
Okay, so that was a brief overview of TFTP
with a few details about its operation.
Next I’ll introduce FTP and then we’ll compare
the two. FTP was first standardized in 1971.
This is actually before TCP and
IP, so FTP is a very old protocol,
although it has of course been updated
since. FTP uses TCP ports 20 and 21,
instead of just a single well-known port. In
the next slide you’ll see why. Unlike TFTP,
usernames and passwords are used for
authentication. However, just like in TFTP,
there is no encryption. Everything is sent in
plain text, including the user name and password.
For greater security, FTPS, FTP over SSL/TLS,
can be used. This protocol is also called
FTP Secure. Another option is SSH File Transfer
Protocol, SFTP. Note that FTPS is an upgrade to
FTP, adding greater security, whereas SFTP is a
different protocol that just has a similar name.
FTP is more complex than TFTP and
allows not only file transfers,
but clients can also navigate file directories,
add and remove directories, list files, etc.
In TFTP, the client could only tell the server
‘give me this file’ or ‘take this file’,
it couldn’t even ask the server ‘what files do
you have?’. The client sends FTP commands to
the server to perform FTP’s functions.
There are many different FTP commands,
and you can view a list of them here
on Wikipedia if you’re interested.
As I said, FTP uses two different
well-known ports: TCP ports 20 and 21.
That’s because FTP uses two types of connections.
An FTP control connection to TCP port 21
is established and used to send FTP commands. The
client sends commands when it wants to perform an
action, such as retrieving a file from the server,
and the server sends replies to acknowledge.
However, the actual data transfer isn’t
done using this control connection.
When files or data are to be transferred,
separate FTP data connections to TCP port 20
are established and terminated as needed. So, let
me demonstrate the control connection. The client
initiates the TCP connection, and the usual
SYN, then SYN-ACK, then ACK exchange is used.
Now the FTP control connection is established.
The client will send FTP commands to the server,
for example to say that the PC wants to get
a file from the server. The server replies to
acknowledge the command. But now we need an FTP
data connection to actually transfer the data.
There are actually two different modes which
can be used to establish an FTP data connection.
The default method of establishing FTP data
connections is active mode, in which the server
initiates the TCP connection. So, as you can see
the first arrow, which would be the initial TCP
SYN message, is from the server to the client.
Now the FTP data connection is established,
and the data can be exchanged. So, the point I
want you to remember is that in FTP active mode,
the server initiates the data connection. Also,
note that the FTP control connection is maintained
throughout this whole process. It isn’t
terminated, so there are two active connections.
So, active is considered the ‘normal’
mode of initiating FTP data connections.
However, notice the network has changed. The
client is now behind a firewall. In FTP passive
mode, the client initiates the data connection.
This is often necessary when the client is behind
a firewall, which could block the incoming
connection from the server. So, now the first
message in the TCP connection is initiated by the
client. The firewall permits the server’s replies,
but it would block the message if the server
tried to initiate the TCP connection itself.
Once the FTP data connection is established, the
data is exchanged. So, here’s what I want you
to remember. Firewalls usually don’t permit
‘outside’ devices to initiate connections.
In this case, FTP passive mode is used and
the client, which is behind the firewall,
initiates the TCP connection. By the way,
if you’re interested in learning more about
firewalls, consider studying for the CCNP security
certification at some point in the future.
Okay, that’s enough about FTP. FTP is more
complex than TFTP and it would take a long
time to really cover all there is to know
about FTP, but I think that’s enough for
now. So let’s briefly compare FTP and TFTP. FTP
uses TCP for connection-based communication.
Port 20 is used for data connections, and
port 21 is used for control connections.
TFTP on the other hand uses UDP port
69 for connectionless communication,
although there is a basic form of
connection within the protocol itself.
FTP clients can use commands to perform various
actions, not just copy files. However TFTP
clients can only copy files to or from the
server. They can’t delete files, list files, etc.
FTP uses usernames and passwords to limit who
can access the server. TFTP, on the other hand,
has no authentication system at all. So, FTP is
a more complex protocol, and TFTP is simpler.
Okay, let’s move on to look at the IOS file
systems. This is going to be a very brief
introduction, just this slide, but I want
to introduce it because we will be looking
at transferring files from TFTP and FTP servers
onto a Cisco IOS device. A file system is a way
of controlling how data is stored and retrieved.
If you have a PC, it certainly has its own file
system. You can view the file systems of a Cisco
IOS device with the command SHOW FILE SYSTEMS.
And here’s some sample output. Note that there
are quite a few file systems, and I even cut out
a few because the output was too long. And note
that there are different types of file systems.
The disk type refers to storage devices such as
flash memory. This is usually where the Cisco
IOS file itself is stored. When the device boots
up, it copies the IOS file from flash into RAM.
The opaque disk type is used for specific internal
functions. These refer to logical internal
systems, not actual separate storage devices. The
NVRAM type refers to the NVRAM, non-volatile RAM,
of the device. Normal RAM loses all of
its data when the device loses power.
However NVRAM does not. The startup-config file is
stored in NVRAM. There is also the network type.
This represents external file systems, for
example FTP or TFTP servers. I don’t think
you’ll find any questions about these file
systems on the exam, the topic was removed
in the newest version of the CCNA. So, we’ll
end this introduction here. Next let’s actually
look at how to use TFTP and FTP to transfer
files into the flash memory of Cisco devices.
So, here’s a very simple network we’ll use
to demonstrate TFTP and FTP. R1 is a Cisco
router running Cisco IOS, and we have downloaded
a new version of IOS and saved it on SRV1. SRV1
is a server running both TFTP and FTP, and
we’ll try out both of them to get the new
version of IOS from SRV1 onto R1. First, you can
view the current version of IOS running on R1 with
SHOW VERSION. Here you can see the image name,
C2900-UNIVERSALK9-M. Notice the K9, meaning it
supports cryptographic features like SSH. Then
the version number, 15.1(4)M4. Perhaps in a future
video I’ll talk about the naming conventions of
IOS versions, but I’ll skip over it for now. The
output of SHOW VERSION is actually quite
long, I’m just showing the top portion.
By the way, for simplicity’s sake I’m actually
using packet tracer for this demonstration,
although usually I use GNS3. You can also
view the contents of flash with SHOW FLASH.
Here it is, and you can see the IOS image
here. So, what we’re going to do now is use
TFTP to copy a new version of IOS from SRV1
to the flash of R1, configure R1 to boot
with the new version of IOS, and then
finally delete the old version from flash.
And here’s how to copy the file using TFTP. The
command is COPY, followed by the source and the
destination. By using TFTP as the source,
you tell the router that you want to access
a TFTP server. The router then asks you
for the IP address of the remote host.
This is where you enter the TFTP server’s IP
address. Then enter the source filename, the name
of the file you want to download. Note that you
have to know this beforehand. TFTP isn’t capable
of asking a server ‘what files do you have?’. I
already knew the name of the file on the server,
so I entered it. Then you’re asked what name
you want to save the file as on the router.
You can just hit enter to accept the default name,
which is the same name as on the TFTP server.
And that’s it, the file is then transferred
from the TFTP server to the router.
I used SHOW FLASH to check the contents of flash.
Here you can see the new version of IOS that was
copied from the TFTP server. Now, how do we make
the router use this file as its OS instead of
the old file? From global config mode, use the
command BOOT SYSTEM, followed by the filepath.
Note that, if you don’t use this command
the router will boot using the first IOS
file it finds in flash. So, you should use this
command to force it to use the newer version.
After that, make sure you save the configuration
before reloading the device, or the BOOT SYSTEM
command won’t take effect. Then simply use
the RELOAD command to restart the device.
After the device finished restarting I used SHOW
VERSION to check the running version of IOS,
and R1 is now using the new version, 15.5,
instead of the old one, 15.1. Finally, let’s
delete that old version of IOS. We don’t need it
anymore, it’s just taking up space on the device.
The command to delete a file is
DELETE, followed by the filepath.
It asks you to confirm, so I did. And then I
used SHOW FLASH to view the contents of flash,
and now the old file is gone.
So, we successfully used TFTP
to copy an IOS file to R1 from a TFTP server. We
then configured R1 to boot using that IOS file,
and then reloaded R1. Finally, we deleted
the old IOS image from the device.
Now let’s take a look at FTP. I’ll only show
the process of transferring the file from the
server to the router, because the rest is
the same. Once the file is on the device,
the other steps such as the BOOT SYSTEM command,
deleting the old file, etc, are all the same.
First, you should configure the username
and password that the router will use when
connecting to an FTP server. Remember, FTP
authenticates using a username and password.
So, this same username and password
must be configured on the server, too.
In this case, I configured the username and
password as cisco. Then the copy command itself
is basically the same. COPY FTP: FLASH:, and then
enter the FTP server’s IP address, the source file
name, and the name you want to save the file
as on the local router. That’s it. Then to
upgrade the IOS we could use the same BOOT SYSTEM
command, save the config, and reload the router.
Okay, here are the commands we just used.
If you don’t remember any of these commands,
go back in the video to review. I
also want to say something about the
COPY command. This actually isn’t the first time
we’ve seen that command. Previously I introduced
it as COPY RUNNING-CONFIG STARTUP-CONFIG, as a
method to save the configuration of the device.
It copies the source, the current running
config, to the destination, the startup config.
Okay, before the quiz let’s review what we
covered. First, the purpose of FTP and TFTP.
Basically, they allow you to
transfer files between devices
over a network. Then I gave an overview of TFTP
and FTP, and compared the two. TFTP is simpler
and useful for quickly transferring
small files in a controlled environment,
but has no advanced functionalities
or any security features.
FTP has much greater functionality, and includes
username and password authentication. And if you
use FTPS, it has many other security benefits,
but that’s out of the scope of this video.
Then I very briefly introduced the file systems in
Cisco IOS. And finally showed how to use TFTP and
FTP to get a new IOS file from a server, and then
reboot the device with the new version of IOS.
Once again, make sure to watch until the end
of the quiz for a bonus question from Boson
Software’s ExSim, the best practice exams for the
CCNA. Okay, let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Which of the following
statements about FTP are true?
Select two. Pause the video
now to think about the answers.
The answers are B, FTP control
connections use TCP port 21,
and D, FTP data connections use TCP port 20.
FTP uses TCP to provide reliable communications
and other features. It uses port 21 to establish a
control connection for sending FTP commands and
replies to those commands, and then uses port
20 to establish data connections for the actual
exchange of data. Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following commands can be used to
transfer a file from an external TFTP server
to the local device’s flash storage? Pause
the video now to think about the answer.
The answer is A, COPY TFTP: FLASH:. The command
is COPY, then the source and then the destination,
so this copies a file from a TFTP server
to flash. Okay, let’s go to question 3.
R1 is behind a firewall and wants to
connect to an external FTP server.
Which of the following statements is true?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
The answer is C, R1 should use FTP
passive mode for the data connection.
Active and passive mode only
apply to the FTP data connections,
because the client always initiates the control
connection. In active mode, the server initiates
the data connection. But in passive mode,
the client initiates the data connection.
When a client is behind a firewall, passive mode
should be used. Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which type of file system is used to store the
startup-config of a device running Cisco IOS?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
The answer is D, NVRAM. NVRAM, non-volatile
RAM, is a type of RAM that preserves data
even after the device loses power. It
is used to store the startup-config
of the device. Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following functions
are NOT possible when using TFTP?
(select two). Pause the video
now to think about the answers.
The answers are B, create a new directory on a
server, and C, list the contents of a server.
TFTP is very simple and only
allows a client to copy a file
to or from a server, it has no other functions.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz. Now let’s take
a look at a bonus question from
Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson ExSim practice
question. Which of the following Application
layer protocols use UDP for unsynchronized,
connectionless data transfer? Select 2 choices.
So, here are the choices. Pause the
video now to think about the answers.
Okay let's check. So, I think the correct answers
are TFTP. That uses UDP for unsynchronized,
connectionless data transfer. Now, it says
connectionless, but as I showed TFTP does use
some basic kind of connection
within the protocol itself.
But it doesn't use TCP connections at Layer 4, so
it is one of the correct answers. And also SNMP,
Simple Network Management Protocol. As we covered
recently in the course, it also uses UDP. It is
not TCP-based, it doesn't use TCP connections.
And HTTP, I mentioned, does use TCP, and also SMTP
which we don't cover in the course, but that is
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. It also uses TCP.
Okay, so I will click on show answer. And that
is correct. So, here is Boson's explanation,
which just outlines the different protocols and
explains about TCP and UDP. So, you can pause the
video now to read Boson's explanation. Okay, so
that was a quick look at a bonus question in Boson
Software's ExSim for CCNA. These are without
a doubt the best practice exams for the CCNA.
So, if you want to get Boson ExSim, please
follow the link in the video description.
There are supplementary materials for this video.
There is a flashcard deck to
use with the software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video. Sign up for my
mailing list via the link in the description,
and I’ll send you all of the flashcards
and packet tracer lab files for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under the
video. Thank you to Serge, Njoku, Viktor, Roger,
Raj, Kenneth, Seamus, H W, Brandon, Samil, Aaron,
Marcel, Kone, Donald, C Mohd, Gustavo, Anthony,
Junhong, Benjamin, Tshepiso, Justin, Prakaash,
Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Daming, Jhilmar, Ed,
Value, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif,
Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the
time of recording by the way, March 7th 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please subscribe
to the channel, like the video,
leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.